- Ever since the invention
of nuclear weapons,
humanity has almost
accidentally destroyed itself
many times over.
This is a video about
just some of those times.
(rocket whooshing)
It's about nuclear bombs
and missiles accidentally detonating.
It's about hydrogen bombs being lost.
And it's about false
alarms that could have led
to the end of the world.
(bomb rumbling)
On the 17th of January, 1966,
a B-52 bomber was flying
over the coast of Spain.
It was carrying four hydrogen bombs,
each one 75 times more powerful
than the bomb dropped on Hiroshima.
This sounds crazy, but in the mid 1960s,
during the height of the Cold War,
this was routine.
This was part of a military
operation known as Chrome Dome
where bombers flew
around the United States
and skirted the borders
of the Soviet Union
with hydrogen bombs on board.
The thinking was that if the
USSR initiated a first strike,
the US could rapidly retaliate
by having bombers already up in the air
and closer to their targets.
The flight took off from North Carolina
and crossed the Atlantic Ocean
with the plan to fly by the
border of the Soviet Union
and return home.
The plane would be in the
air for more than 24 hours.
The flight was so long, it
required two mid-air refuelings.
But long flights and mid-air
refuelings were commonplace.
Flights like this happened every day.
The first refuelling went smoothly.
After flying by the Soviet
Union and turning around,
the plane needed to be refuelled again.
So at 10:30 a.m., over the coast of Spain,
above the small fishing
village of Palomares,
the refuelling tanker pulled
up in front of the B-52.
Larry Messinger, the pilot
of the bomber, recalled.
- [Larry] We came up behind the tanker
and we were going a little bit too fast.
There's a procedure they
have where the boom operator,
if you get in a dangerous position,
he calls, "Break away,
break away, break away,"
and you immediately cut the
throttles and drop down below.
Well, there was no such call.
We were dropping down below the tanker
and all of a sudden something happened.
There was an explosion of some kind.
- The two planes collided.
The boom arm, which held
the refuelling nozzle,
hit the B-52, breaking off its left wing.
The resulting explosion was big enough
that it was witnessed by another B-52
which was flying a
kilometre and a half away.
All four men on the refuelling tanker
and three of the seven on the B-52
were killed in the accident.
The four bombs fell to earth.
Each one of them had a yield
of 1.1 megatons of TNT,
about 75 times more powerful
than the bomb dropped on Hiroshima.
A hydrogen bomb gets most of its power
from the fusion of tritium and deuterium,
which are isotopes of
hydrogen with extra neutrons.
When these isotopes fuse into helium,
a little bit of mass is lost,
which is released as energy.
But it takes a tremendous amount of energy
to get that reaction started,
which is why a hydrogen bomb
is actually three bombs in one.
A conventional bomb
which when detonated triggers
the plutonium fission bomb
which then creates high enough
temperatures and pressures
and releases enough energetic X-rays
to trigger the fusion reaction.
The conventional explosives
in two of the four bombs
detonated on impact.
Fortunately, to trigger
the fission reaction,
the explosion needs to be symmetrical.
But since the conventional explosives
detonated on impact with the ground,
the shockwave wasn't symmetrical
and so the fission and
fusion bombs weren't set off.
Unfortunately, the conventional explosive
blew up the plutonium core,
contaminating a 2.6-square-kilometer area
of the Spanish coastline
with radioactive material.
The area is still contaminated
with radioactive atoms
to this day.
- [Reporter] But after the
crash the villagers were told
to eat no locally produced food
and there was an embargo
on it in nearby markets.
- The third bomb was found
intact in a nearby riverbed.
But the fourth bomb was missing.
- [Reporter] Somewhere out there
off the sunny coast of southern Spain
and H bomb is missing.
It's been missing now
for over three weeks.
- Mr. Ambassador, how was
your swim this morning?
Did you by any chance
stub your toe on the bomb
while you were out there today?
- Wish I had.
- 29 US Army ships were
involved in the search,
and it still took 81 days
for the bomb to finally
be located and recovered.
I wanna say this again.
There was a hydrogen bomb that
was 75 times more powerful
than the one dropped on Hiroshima,
and it was missing for
nearly three months.
This is not an isolated incident.
It's common enough that
the US military has a term
for accidents involving nuclear weapons.
- [Reporter] The D-Day
clock thus begun ticking
with a potential Broken Arrow message
from Nellis Air Force Base.
- They call them Broken Arrows.
The Pentagon officially
lists 32 such accidents
between 1950 and 1980.
Five of them occurred during
operation Chrome Dome,
cases when a B-52 carrying
hydrogen bombs crashed.
In 1961, the first year
of operation Chrome Dome,
a B-52 had a fuel leak and it
crashed over North Carolina.
Three members of the crew
died in the accident.
It was carrying two 4-megaton bombs.
Both bombs fell to earth.
One had its parachute deploy
and it landed on the ground mostly intact.
The other slammed into a
field and broke into pieces.
The good news is that the
conventional explosives
did not explode,
so radioactive plutonium was not strewn
all over North Carolina.
The bad news
is that the conventional
explosives didn't explode,
and so there was a chance
that the hydrogen bombs could
be armed and ready to detonate
with full force.
Recalling the incident 52 years later,
Lieutenant Jack ReVelle,
who was responsible for the
safe disposal of the bomb, said.
- [Jack] And as we started digging down,
trying to find the second bomb,
one of my sergeants says,
"Hey, Lieutenant, I found
the arm safe switch."
And I said, "Great."
He says, "No, not great.
It's on arm."
- At the time, a spokesman
for the Department of Defence
said that the bombs were unarmed
and could not have accidentally exploded.
But in a report declassified in 2013,
it was stated that the bomb was armed.
A single switch could have
triggered the detonation.
By the way, the bomb is still there,
lodged about 50 metres under the field.
After the bomb fell on the field,
there was a flash flood,
which meant that it couldn't be recovered.
So to make sure that no
one could dig up the bomb,
the US military placed a 120-meter
diameter slab of concrete
over the whole area.
According to the Pentagon report,
there is no detectable radiation
and no hazard in the area,
but a portion of one weapon
containing uranium is missing.
There are dozens more events like this,
like the plane crash
over Greenland in 1968.
The four hydrogen bombs it was carrying
burned up in the fire.
The decontamination of
the surrounding area
took four months.
That same year, the Soviet K-129 submarine
sank in the Pacific Ocean,
killing all 98 of its crew.
It was also carrying
three nuclear warheads.
Part of the submarine was
covertly recovered by the CIA.
Another standout incident
occurred in 1965,
about 100 kilometres
off the coast of Japan.
A Douglas A-4 jet carrying
at least one hydrogen bomb
fell off the aircraft carrier
during a training exercise.
The plane, the bomb, and the
pilot were never recovered.
So, for more than half a century,
there has been a 1-megaton hydrogen bomb
laying on the sea floor
four kilometres below
the surface of the ocean.
It is one of at least
six US nuclear weapons
that have been lost and never recovered.
In 1998, Alexander Lebed,
Russia's former Chief
of National Security,
asserted that there are more than 100
1-kiloton nuclear bombs
that are unaccounted for.
The most well-known Broken Arrow event
happened in September 1980.
Inside a silo in rural Arkansas,
a team was conducting routine checks
on the Titan II intercontinental
ballistic missile.
The missile was fueled,
ready to launch at a moment's notice.
In its nose cone sat a
9-megaton hydrogen bomb.
As one of the repairmen was
walking around the silo,
the socket from his
ratchet wrench fell off.
(ominous music)
It fell 24 metres,
hitting the fuel tank of the
missile and puncturing a hole.
The highly flammable rocket fuel
began to leak into the silo.
The missile complex and
surrounding area were evacuated,
but a number of military
personnel remained on site
to try to diffuse the situation.
- The maintenance team
had an indication of an engine fire
and a rise in vapour
concentration inside the silo.
- At 3:00 a.m.,
about 8 1/2 hours after the
puncture of the fuel tank,
the leaking fuel vapours ignited,
resulting in an explosion.
This explosion led to one
death and 21 injuries.
The 740-ton door keeping the silo sealed
flew more than 60 metres into the air.
It was recovered 200 metres away.
The warhead containing the hydrogen bomb
was also blown out of the silo,
landing some 30 metres away.
Luckily, it did not detonate.
And these are just the near
misses that we know about.
Of the 32 Broken Arrow events
listed by the Pentagon,
one which occurred in the spring
of 1968 remains classified.
And there are likely many
dozens more nuclear mistakes
and near misses the
public knows nothing about
from every nation that
has a nuclear arsenal.
The worry of a nuclear mishap
is not just the immediate damage done
by a hydrogen bomb explosion.
It's also the misunderstanding
and retaliatory strikes that could arise.
Imagine that in 1966,
instead of hydrogen bombs
falling off the coast of Spain,
the plane crash occurred closer
to the border with the Soviet Union.
Humanity has been on the brink
of nuclear war many times
and so far we've been lucky.
The closest we've likely
ever come was in October 1962
during the Cuban Missile Crisis.
The US Navy began dropping
signalling charges into the water
to bring a Soviet
submarine to the surface.
Tensions were high and the submarine
had not been in radio
contact with Moscow for days.
The captain of the submarine
decided that war had broken out
and he was about to
launch a nuclear torpedo.
But the launch required the
authorization of three men.
Two out of the three
authorised the launch,
but Vasili Arkhipov did not.
A full-blown nuclear exchange
between the United States
and the Soviet Union
was avoided by the rational
decision of one person.
The historian Arthur
Schlesinger Jr. later noted
that "this was not only
the most dangerous moment
of the Cold War.
It was the most dangerous
moment in human history."
And during the Cuban Missile Crisis,
with the tensions between the US and USSR
at an all-time high,
both countries still conducted
high-altitude nuclear tests.
The US set off a 410-kiloton bomb
50 kilometres above the Pacific Ocean
and a smaller 7-kiloton bomb
at an altitude of 147 kilometres.
Two of the 300 kiloton tests
conducted by the Soviets
occurred in space.
It's pretty hard to justify these actions.
What if one of these
tests was thought to be
a nuclear first strike
leading to all-out war?
Because false alarms happen
for something a lot more innocuous
than nuclear tests in space.
On the 26th of September, 1983,
the Soviet satellite-based
early warning system
detected the launch
of an intercontinental ballistic missile,
and their policy dictated
that if any inbound
missiles were detected,
there was to be an
immediate counter attack
against the United States.
This would've likely led to all-out war.
But the Soviet officer on duty
at the time of the
detection, Stanislav Petrov,
was sceptical of the reading.
He reasoned that if there
was a genuine first strike,
the US would launch hundreds
of ICBMs simultaneously,
not just one.
The detection system then warned Petrov
of another four missiles
headed towards the USSR,
but these two, he dismissed as a glitch.
Petrov was right.
He made the right decision
and his clear thinking likely
saved millions of lives.
The warning system malfunctioned,
it confused sunlight reflecting
off high-altitude clouds
for ballistic missiles.
After this incident,
Petrov took an early retirement
and later suffered a nervous breakdown.
Another close call happened
on January 25th, 1995,
when scientists launched a
rocket off the coast of Norway.
Their rocket was there to
study the Northern Lights
but Russian radar picked up this launch
as it had a similar
flight pattern and speed
as the submarine-launched Trident ICBM.
The incident was serious enough
that a briefcase containing
the nuclear launch codes
was taken to the Russian
President, Boris Yeltsin.
I think most people believe
the biggest threat
posed by nuclear weapons
is their deliberate use.
There is this idea that as
long as nations only have them
and don't use them,
they could act as a
deterrent keeping us safer.
But all of these incidents demonstrate
that the real risk of nuclear weapons
is some freak accident.
So far, humanity has been lucky,
but how long until our luck runs out?
But there is hope.
In 1986, there were more
than 70,000 nuclear weapons.
In 2022, that number
had dropped to 12,705,
and more are being dismantled.
But as long as there are any
nuclear weapons remaining,
the future of humanity is not safe.
(electronic beeping)
Hey, this part of the
video is brought to you
by Henson Shaving.
Close shaves are bad when
it comes to nuclear weapons
but they're great when
it comes to shaving.
Henson is a company that was
started by aerospace machinists
who wanted to use their experience
in precision manufacturing
to create a better shaving experience.
And honestly, I think they've succeeded.
I've been using their AL13
for the past few months
and it's the best shave I've ever had.
The razor is made using CNC machines
with incredibly tight tolerances,
so the blade sticks out
just .03 millimetres.
This means that the blade
is perfectly supported
which reduces chatter,
the up and down movement of the blade.
This reduction in chatter
reduces skin irritation.
In fact, Henson conducted a test
where participants shaved
the left part of their face
with a multi-blade razor
and the right part with the AL13,
and they saw a statistically
significant reduction
in skin irritation when
the Henson razor was used.
The AL13 is really high quality
and it uses standard double-edged blades
which are much less expensive
than the proprietary blades
sold by other companies.
So, once you own a Henson razor,
the cost of shaving works out
to be just 3 to $5 per year,
depending on how often you shave.
And because you're not
throwing away all that plastic,
it's also much better for the environment.
So, if you'd like to have
a better shaving experience
while saving money and
helping the environment,
head on over to HensonShaving.com
and enter code Veritasium
for 100 free blades
with the purchase of a razor.
I wanna thank Henson for
sponsoring this part of the video
and I want to thank you for watching.